Checkout description, API and configuration (#1868)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/commerce/checkout/checkout_api.md

---
description: Use PHP API to work with checkouts in Commerce.
edition: commerce
---

# Checkout API

> To get checkouts and manage them, use the `\Ibexa\Contracts\Checkout\CheckouterviceInterface` interface.

Author: no backslash is only our internal convention
```suggestion
To get checkouts and manage them, use the `Ibexa\Contracts\Checkout\CheckoutServiceInterface` interface.
```

> To manipulate checkouts that are stored in sessions, you use `CheckoutService`. 

Author: That is not correct AFAIK, you should use the interface above for all cases, unless @konradoboza will correct me.

Reviewer: @DominikaK is right, exactly like above.

Checkouts are containers for the `Ibexa\Contracts\Cart\Value\CartInterface` object 
and all the data provided at each step of the [configurable checkout process](configure_checkout.md). 

> The dataset is flexible but minimized due to session size restrictions. 

Author: I'm wondering if we need this information from the point of view of the user, or is it just implementation details.

Therefore, objects cannot contain too much data and must be serializable. 

The checkout process relies on Symfony Workflow, and you can customize each of its steps. 
Each checkout step has its own controller that allows adding forms and external API calls 
that process data and pass them to `CheckoutService`. 
Completing a step results in submitting a form and updating the current checkout object. 
At this point Symfony Workflow advances, the next controller takes over, and the 
whole process continues.

> From the developer's perspective, checkouts are referenced with the UUID identifier. 

Author: ```suggestion
From the developer's perspective, checkouts are referenced with an UUID identifier. 
```

## Get single checkout by identifier

To access a single checkout, use the `CheckoutServiceInterface::getCheckout` method:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/commerce/src/Controller/CustomCheckoutController.php', 31, 32) =]]
```

## Get single checkout for specific cart

To fetch checkout for a cart that already exists, use the `CheckoutServiceInterface::getCheckoutForCart` method. 

> It can come in handy when you want to initiate the checkout process right after 

Author: ```suggestion
It can be useful when you want to start the checkout process right after 
```

> products are completed within a cart.

Author: ```suggestion
products are added to a cart.
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/commerce/src/Controller/CustomCheckoutController.php', 23, 27) =]]
```

## Create checkout

> To create a cart, use the `CheckoutServiceInterface::createCheckout` method and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a checkout, use the `CheckoutServiceInterface::createCheckout` method and 
```

> provide it with `Ibexa\Contracts\Checkout\Value\CheckoutCreateStruct` that contains  `Ibexa\Contracts\Cart\Value\CartInterface`.

Author: ```suggestion
provide it with a `Ibexa\Contracts\Checkout\Value\CheckoutCreateStruct` that contains an `Ibexa\Contracts\Cart\Value\CartInterface` object.
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/commerce/src/Controller/CustomCheckoutController.php', 34, 40) =]]
```

## Update checkout

You can update the collected data after the checkout is created.
The data is stored within the `Ibexa\Contracts\Checkout\Value\CheckoutInterface::context` object. 

> The last update time and status are also identified. 

Author: ```suggestion
The last update time and status are also stored. 
```
